Rewrite binomial formula derivation (#33)
Akuli/math-derivations: content/discrete/binom.txt

graybox:
    Let $n$ and $k$ be integers such that $0 \le k \le n$.
    The binomial coefficient $\binom{n}{k}$, spelled "$n$ choose $k$",
    is the number of subsets of size $k$ that a set of size $n$ has.

Here "subset" means any set whose elements are contained in the original set.
For example, here are all subsets of the set $\{1,2,3\}$:

* The empty set
* $\{1\}$
* $\{2\}$
* $\{3\}$
* $\{1,2\}$
* $\{1,3\}$
* $\{2,3\}$
* $\{1,2,3\}$

Sets cannot contain duplicates and the order doesn't matter,
so $\{2,1\}$ would be the same set as $\{1,2\}$,
and $\{3,3\}$ would be the same set as $\{3\}$.
Also note that any set is a subset of itself, and the empty set is a subset of any set.

Based on the above list, we can calculate some binomial coefficients:

* There is one subset of zero elements (the empty set), so $\binom{3}{0} = 1$. (Read this as "3 choose 0 is 1".)
* There are three subsets of one element, so $\binom{3}{1} = 3$.
* There are three subsets of two elements, so $\binom{3}{2} = 3$.
* There is one subset of three elements, so $\binom{3}{3} = 1$.

## Formula

Listing all subsets can be quite painful.

> For example, to calculating $\binom{7}{3}$,

Author: ```suggestion
For example, to calculate $\binom{7}{3}$,
```

we could take a set of seven elements, say $\{A,B,C,D,E,F,G\}$,
and find all subsets of three elements:

* $\{A,B,C\}$
* $\{A,B,D\}$
* $\{A,B,E\}$
* $\{A,B,F\}$
* $\{A,B,G\}$
* $\{A,C,D\}$
* $\{A,C,E\}$
* $\{A,C,F\}$
* $\{A,C,G\}$
* $\{A,D,E\}$
* $\{A,D,F\}$
* $\{A,D,G\}$
* $\{A,E,F\}$
* $\{A,E,G\}$
* $\{A,F,G\}$
* $\{B,C,D\}$
* $\{B,C,E\}$
* ...and many more...

> There are 17 different subsets above, so $\binom{7}{3} > 17$,
> but we clearly need a better way to calculate these.

Author: ```suggestion
I gave up after finding 17 different subsets, which shows that $\binom{7}{3} > 17$.
This also shows that we need a better way to calculate binomial coefficients.
```

where $k!$ is the **factorial** of $k$, defined by
$$
k! = k \cdot (k-1) \cdot (k-2) \cdot \dots \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1.
$$

graybox:
    Binomial coefficients can be calculated as
    $$
    \binom{n}{k} = \frac{~~ \overbrace{n(n-1)(n-2)\dots}^{\text{$k$ numbers multiplied}} ~~}{k!},
    $$
    where $k!= k \cdot (k-1) \cdot \dots \cdot 3\cdot2\cdot1$ is the number of ways to sort a list of $k$ elements.

For example,
$$
\binom{7}{3} = \frac{7 \cdot 6 \cdot 5}{3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = 35,
$$
and
$$
\binom{9}{4} = \frac{9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7 \cdot 6}{4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = 126.
$$

This result is often written as
$$
\binom{n}{k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}.
$$
Here dividing by $(n-k)!$ deletes the last $n-k$ numbers that were multiplied into $n!$ on top, leaving only the first $k$ numbers.
For example, with $n=9$ and $k=4$, it deletes the last 5 numbers and leaves the first 4, like this:
$$
\frac{9!}{4!(9-4)!} = \frac{9!}{4! \cdot 5!} = \frac{9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7 \cdot 6 \cdot \cancel{5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1}}{(4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1) \cdot \cancel{(5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1)}}
= \frac{9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7 \cdot 6}{4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1}
$$

> ## Pascal's Triangle

Author: ```suggestion
## Pascal's triangle
```

> Let's arrange ones into a triangle shape, like this:

Author: ```suggestion
Let's draw a triangle shape with ones, like this:
```

$$
\begin{matrix}
&&&1&&&\\
&&1&&1&&\\
&1&& &&1&\\
1&& && &&1\\
\end{matrix}
$$
Then, whenever two numbers are next to each other, we write their sum below them (for example, $\blue{1} + \blue{1} = \red{2}$):
$$
\begin{matrix}
&&&1&&&\\
&&\blue{1}&&\blue{1}&&\\
&1&&\red{2}&&1&\\
1&& && &&1\\
\end{matrix}
$$
<br>
$$
\begin{matrix}
&&&1&&&\\
&&1&&1&&\\
&\blue{1}&&\blue{2}&&1&\\
1&&\red{3}&& &&1\\
\end{matrix}
$$
<br>
$$
\begin{matrix}
&&&1&&&\\
&&1&&1&&\\
&1&&\blue{2}&&\blue{1}&\\
1&&3&&\red{3}&&1\\
\end{matrix}
$$
This is called **Pascal's triangle**.

The numbers in Pascal's triangle look familiar.
For example, the row $1,3,3,1$ is actually $\binom{3}{0},\binom{3}{1},\binom{3}{2},\binom{3}{3}$
(see the beginning of this page).
Let's draw the triangle a bit more:

python:

>     from math import factorial

Author: ```suggestion
```

    from itertools import pairwise

>     def pascal(n, k):
>         if k == 0 or k == n:
>             return 1
>         return pascal(n-1, k-1) + pascal(n-1, k)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

  chosen out of the 4 remaining products (bananas, cheese, donuts, eggs).
  This can be done in $\blue{\binom{4}{2}}$ different ways.
* If we don't choose apples, then we choose all 3 products among the 4 products that are not apples.
  This can be done in $\green{\binom{4}{3}}$ different ways.

So the total number of ways to fill the shopping bag is $\blue{\binom{4}{2}} + \green{\binom{4}{3}}$.
But we also know that it's $\red{\binom{5}{3}}$, so
$$
\blue{\binom{4}{2}} + \green{\binom{4}{3}} = \red{\binom{5}{3}}.
$$

The same reasoning works with any location in the triangle.
If you buy $k$ products from a shop that sells $n$ products ($\red{\binom{n}{k}}$),
you can either buy apples and $k-1$ other products ($\blue{\binom{n-1}{k-1}}$),
or buy $k$ other products ($\green{\binom{n-1}{k}}$), so
$$
\red{\binom{n}{k}} = \blue{\binom{n-1}{k-1}} + \green{\binom{n-1}{k}}.
$$

graybox:
    Binomial coefficients can be looked up from Pascal's triangle,
    where we place ones on the edges and the sum of any two adjacent numbers below them.
    If the top of the triangle is row zero column zero,
    then $\binom{n}{k}$ is the number in row $n$ column $k$.

    comment:

>         If fits, show the two triangles side by side. If not, stack them vertically.

Author: ```suggestion
        If fits, show the two triangles side by side with gap in between. If not, stack them vertically.
```

    <div style="text-align: center; letter-spacing: 2em">
        <div style="display: inline-block">
            $$
            \begin{matrix}
            &&&&1&&&&\\
            &&&1&&1&&&\\
            &&1&&2&&1&&\\
            &1&&3&&3&&1&\\
            1&&4&&6&&4&&1\\
            &&&&\vdots&&&&
            \end{matrix}
            $$
        </div>
        <div style="display: inline-block">
            $$
            \begin{matrix}
            &&&&\binom{0}{0}&&&&\\
            &&&\binom{1}{0}&&\binom{1}{1}&&&\\
            &&\binom{2}{0}&&\binom{2}{1}&&\binom{2}{2}&&\\
            &\binom{3}{0}&&\binom{3}{1}&&\binom{3}{2}&&\binom{3}{3}&\\
            \binom{4}{0}&&\binom{4}{1}&&\binom{4}{2}&&\binom{4}{3}&&\binom{4}{4}\\
            &&&&\vdots&&&&
            \end{matrix}
            $$
        </div>
    </div>

## Binomial Formula

I haven't explained yet why binomial coefficients are called binomial coefficients.

Consider the formula
$$
(a+b)^2 = a^2+2ab+b^2.
$$
There is a similar formula for $(a+b)^3$. To get it from this one, we can multiply it by $a+b$:
$$
\begin{align}
(a+b)^3 &= (a+b)(a+b)^2 \\
&= (a+b)(a^2+2ab+b^2) \\
&= a(a^2+2ab+b^2) + b(a^2+2ab+b^2) \\

> &= a^3+2a^2b+ab^2+a^2b+2ab^2+b^3 \\

Author: ```suggestion
&= (a^3+2a^2b+ab^2)+(a^2b+2ab^2+b^3) \\
```

&= a^3+3a^2b+3ab^2+b^3.
\end{align}
$$
By multiplying this with $a+b$ again, we can get a formula for $(a+b)^4$:
$$
\begin{align}
(a+b)^4 &= (a+b)(a+b)^3 \\
&= (a+b)(a^3+3a^2b+3ab^2+b^3) \\

> &= a^4+3a^3b+3a^2b^2+ab^3+a^3b+3a^2b^2+3ab^3+b^4 \\

Author: ```suggestion
&= (a^4+3a^3b+3a^2b^2+ab^3)+(a^3b+3a^2b^2+3ab^3+b^4) \\
```

&= a^4+4a^3b+6a^2b^2+4ab^3+b^4
\end{align}
$$
And again:
$$
\begin{align}
(a+b)^5 &= (a+b)(a^4+4a^3b+6a^2b^2+4ab^3+b^4) \\
&= a^5+5a^4b+10a^3b^2+10a^2b^3+5ab^4+b^5
\end{align}
$$

It seems like the integers (coefficients) in front of $a$'s and $b$'s are rows in Pascal's triangle (e.g. $1~4~6~4~1$ for $(a+b)^4$).
This is why binomial coefficients are called binomial coefficients:
when raising a **binomial** $a+b$ to a power, they are the **coefficients** you need to put in front of $a$'s and $b$'s.

> Next I explain why you can always calculate $(a+b)^n$ using Pascal's triangle in this way.

Author: ```suggestion
Next I explain why the numbers in $(a+b)^n$ formulas form Pascal's triangle.
```

$$
\begin{matrix}
(a+b)^0 = 1                                             & \to & &&&&&1&&&&&\\
(a+b)^1 = a+b                                           & \to & &&&&1&&1&&&&\\
(a+b)^2 = a^2+2ab+b^2                                   & \to & &&&1&&2&&1&&&\\
(a+b)^3 = a^3+3a^2b+3ab^2+b^3                           & \to & &&1&&3&&3&&1&&\\
(a+b)^4 = a^4+\blue{4a^3b}+\green{6a^2b^2}+4ab^3+b^4    & \to & &1&&\blue{4}&&\green{6}&&4&&1&\\
(a+b)^5 = a^5+5a^4b+\red{10a^3b^2}+10a^2b^3+5ab^4+b^5   & \to & 1&&5&&\red{10}&&10&&5&&1\\
                                                        &\vdots&    &&&&&&&&&&
\end{matrix}
$$
For this triangle to be same as Pascal's triangle,
it needs to satisfy the two rules we used to build Pascal's triangle:

* Ones on the edges
* Whenever two numbers are next to each other, their sum is below them

We get ones on the edges, because the numbers in front of $a^n$ and $b^n$ are always 1.

To see why adjacent numbers are added, think about
how we can get $\red{a^3b^2}$ in the $(a+b)^5$ formula
when multiplying the previous formula with $a$ and $b$.
There are only two ways how this can happen,

> as other combination gives the wrong number of $a$'s or $b$'s:

Author: ```suggestion
and any other combination gives the wrong number of $a$'s or $b$'s:
```

* $\green{a^2b^2}$ is multiplied by $a$ (start with one missing $a$ and multiply by $a$)
* $\blue{a^3b}$ is multiplied by $b$ (start with one missing $b$ and multiply by $b$)

> These two ways bring in the numbers from the previous row, like this:

Author: ```suggestion
These two ways bring in two adjacent numbers from the previous row, like this:
```
